CIP-???? | Coin Selection - Optimized Random Improve (#785)
cardano-foundation/CIPs: CIP-_/README.md

---

> CIP: "?"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CIP: ?
```
A basic formatting requirement as per CIP-0001.

Reviewer 2: Thank you! I will update the formatting tomorrow =)

Reviewer: sounds great... I'll commit the essentials now & please let's do the commits gradually rather than force pushing from your end, since one or two of these issues might benefit from group discussion going forward & being able to track the changes. 😎

> Title: Optimized Coin Selection Algorithms for Cardano

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Title: Coin Selection - Optimized Random Improve
```
This first part of this title is far more general than you're presenting here, and the phrase "for Cardano" is unncecessary.  I'll suggest this title & we'll also see how the same title looks in the PR title (if changed further, they should be consistent... and both as few words as possible to convey your idea completely & succinctly).

I'm moving the Coin Selection term first because we have other groupings of CIPs and for which it is proving help to have the general term first & then the specific term (e.g. the Web-Wallet Bridge CIPs) and we're likely to have more multiple coin selection algorithms proposed as well.

Reviewer: @NicholasMaselli committing since no objections & we should have a standardised title for review at CIP meeting tomorrow.

Category: Wallets
Authors:
    - Nicholas Maselli <maselli.nicholas@gmail.com>

> Implementors: CardanoSharp 7, SaturnNFT, Levvy Finance

Reviewer: These also need to be a bullet list, formatted like the `Authors`.  From reading the Implementations below I can't be sure if the second 2 are implementations of _your_ algorithm... if there is any subjectivity about that I would include your reference implementation alone for now.

> Discussions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Discussions:
    - https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/785
```

> Status: Pending

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Status: Proposed
```
... effectively meaning the same thing ("pending" assignment of `Active` status)

> Created: 2024-14-03

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Created: 2024-03-14
```
correcting ISO format date.

License: CC-BY-4.0
---

## Abstract

Coin Selection algorithms have become a critical part of the Cardano ecosystem. These algorithms choose a set of input Utxos for a given set of new Outputs.

This CIP aims to present optimized coin selection algorithms to enable Wallets and Dapps to interact with smart contracts and native assets such as tokens and NFTs in a more efficient way. The goal of these algorithms is to primarily reduce the size of transactions as well as reduce the mem and step required for smart contract executions.

## Motivation: why is this CIP necessary?

> <b>Cardano needs to scale.</b> As the ecosystem grows and new users come in, blocks are regular at 100% load with 88KB per block allocation. Recently, events such as the Lil Sappys NFT mint have pushed the Cardano blockchain load to over 100% for several hours, preventing anyone from using the chain and providing an awful user experience to new users who complain on social media and give the ecosystem a bad reputation.
> 
> <b>This can't continue if Cardano is to succeed.</b>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the Cardano ecosystem grows and new users come in, blocks are regular at 100% load with 88KB per block allocation. Recently, events such as the Lil Sappys NFT mint have pushed the Cardano blockchain load to over 100% for several hours, preventing anyone from using the chain.
```
In general we need to avoid subjective & persuasive language because people cannot generally agree upon these statements at the present time.... let alone years down the road when this document still still persist while these arguments likely won't.

The Motivation is to outline technical imperatives... it's a courtesy to your readers & potential implementors to simply point out the facts that indicate what needs to be changed & allow them to draw their own conclusions about the extent & consequences of the problem.

    -   We are then going to loop through each asset and add it to the most recently created output. If the assets in that output go above the ideal assets per output we create a new output unless the asset is part of an existing policy id. If a change output is over 2kb we create a new output automatically. The max output size on Cardano is 5kb but we are using 2kb to have more evenly split Utxos in users wallet for smaller future transactions.

-   <b>Step 3b)</b>

    -   After looping through each asset we have a list of change outputs. We want to calculate the ada minUtxos required for all of those change outputs.
    -   Using this ada minUtxo number along with the amount of ada in the balance we attempt to evenly distribute ada accross the existing change outputs, with the remainder going to the final change output.

> ## Path to Active

Reviewer: @NicholasMaselli can you reformat this section clearly with checkboxes on each item, like you see for example [in CIP-0095](https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/tree/master/CIP-0095#path-to-active), with the common sections grouped into headings which each have their own checkbox to represent total completion of all items?

Editors, reviewers & implementors should be able to scan down the list & quickly see what's been done & pending.  Any confirmation or qualification of how external implementations relate to the algorithm you are proposing should be documented in the _Rationale_ section instead.

In fact, your CIP doesn't have a `## Rationale` section, which is mandatory.  So I would recommend moving the SaturnNFT and Levvy material into _Rationale_ (immediately before) & addressing how the prior art relates to the algorithm that you put into your own reference implementation & want to bring to Cardano at large.

See `Rationale: how does this CIP achieve its goals?` ([CIP-0001 > Structure](https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/blob/master/CIP-0001/README.md#structure))

---
CIP: ?
Title: Optimized Coin Selection Algorithms for Cardano
Category: Wallets
Authors:
    - Nicholas Maselli <maselli.nicholas@gmail.com>
Implementors: CardanoSharp 7, SaturnNFT, Levvy Finance
Discussions:
    - https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/785
Status: Proposed
Created: 2024-03-14
License: CC-BY-4.0
---

## Abstract

> Coin Selection algorithms have become a critical part of the Cardano ecosystem. These algorithms choose a set of input Utxos for a given set of new Outputs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Coin Selection algorithms are a critical part of any UTxO-based ecosystem. These algorithms choose a set of input UTxOs for a given set of new Outputs.
```

Reviewer: agreed: more specific

> This CIP aims to present optimized coin selection algorithms to enable Wallets and Dapps to interact with smart contracts and native assets such as tokens and NFTs in a more efficient way. The goal of these algorithms is to primarily reduce the size of transactions as well as reduce the mem and step required for smart contract executions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This CIP aims to present an optimized coin selection algorithm to enable Wallets and dApps to interact with smart contracts and native assets in a more efficient way. The primary goal of this algorithm is to reduce the size of transactions as well as the memory and CPU steps required for smart contract executions.
```

Reviewer: agreed: better English & technical term usage

## Motivation: why is this CIP necessary?

> <b>Cardano needs to scale.</b> As the ecosystem grows and new users come in, blocks are regular at 100% load with 88KB per block allocation. Recently, events such as the Lil Sappys NFT mint have pushed the Cardano blockchain load to over 100% for several hours, preventing anyone from using the chain and providing an awful user experience to new users who complain on social media and give the ecosystem a bad reputation.

Reviewer 4: Hi @NicholasMaselli 

Many thanks for creating this CIP!

I have some questions about this event:
> Recently, events such as the Lil Sappys NFT mint have pushed the Cardano blockchain load to over 100% for several hours, preventing anyone from using the chain and providing an awful user experience to new users who complain on social media and give the ecosystem a bad reputation.

Would you be able to give a more complete description of how you believe this particular event is related to the problem of coin selection?

In other words, can you point to specific problems (related to coin selection) that caused or contributed to the situation you describe?

I'd be particularly interested in:
- specific examples of coin selection attempts that failed (for whatever reasons); or
- specific examples of coin selection attempts that produced transactions that were larger than necessary (thus requiring higher fees than necessary)

<b>This can't continue if Cardano is to succeed.</b>

> Currently the existing <a href="https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/tree/master/CIP-0002">CIP-2</a> for coin selection is not sufficient as it was developed in a time before native assets and smart contracts were live on the Cardano Blockchain. Many existing dapps are using extremely poor coin selection resulting in transactions that are 2,3, sometimes 5 times larger then neccesary while also creating outputs that are difficult to handle in future coin selections.

Reviewer 4: > Many existing dapps are using extremely poor coin selection resulting in transactions that are 2,3, sometimes 5 times larger then neccesary while also creating outputs that are difficult to handle in future coin selections.

Are you able to include some worked examples of transactions that are 2, 3, and sometimes 5 times larger than necessary?

> This CIP aims to provide at least 1 algorithm and open the conversation for multiple algorithms to exponentially improve coin selection which will decrease transaction sizes accross the board and increase Cardano's throughput.

Reviewer: ... as with last 2 review facts, in agreement for these types of changes (unless saying otherwise below)

Optimizations are priorized in this order for this CIP:

-   Transaction size reduction.
-   Change Output size reduction for future transactions.

> -   Dust manage to prevent large small dust Utxos from piling up.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-   Dust management to prevent large numbers of small value (dust) UTxOs from piling up.
```

## Specification

### Scope

<a href="https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/tree/master/CIP-0002">CIP-2</a> explains the basics of coin selection, so I won't repeat those here. Instead I will simply present an algorithm for optimizing coin selection. This algorithm will include optimizing the standard coin selection with change selection while also containing suggestions for optimizing collateral selection and optimizing smart contract transactions.

This algorithm will be presented with the following composable structure, allowing for coin and change selection strategies to be composed together:

-   Aggregator Function
-   Input Selection Function
-   Change Selection Function

### Algorithms

> Random improve was an original algorithm presented in <a href="https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/tree/master/CIP-0002">CIP-2</a>, this algorithm had a series of good ideas that can be expanded upon here. The first proposed algorithm will simply be an Optimized Random Improve implementation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Random Improve was an original algorithm presented in <a href="https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/tree/master/CIP-0002">CIP-2</a>, this algorithm had a series of good ideas that can be expanded upon. The proposed algorithm will be an Optimized Random Improve implementation.
```

Reviewer 4: One small point: the original author of this algorithm (Edsko de Vries) called it "Random-Improve" (with a hyphen).

I would propose to use the same style in this document, if possible.

Source: [Self Organisation in Coin Selection](https://iohk.io/en/blog/posts/2018/07/03/self-organisation-in-coin-selection/).

Reviewer: @NicholasMaselli - unless you can demonstrate that your algorithm is an optimisation of some other "Random Improve" algorithm besides the one @jonathanknowles refers to, editorially we would insist upon changing this term everywhere.

Also: a link to this paper, e.g. as a reference implementation, should be added to the mandatory but currently non-existent _Rationale_ section (see https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/785#discussion_r1527167129)  Again, if it's a derivation of that algorithm, it's too integral to the CIP itself to be simply included in a _References_ section at the end.

Reviewer 3: The Random-Improve paper (Self Organisation in Coin Selection) is linked/referenced from CIP-2 :)

#### Optimized Random Improve

> Unlike random improve which operates on a per output basis. This optimized random improve algorithm will operate on a PER ASSET basis. Meaning the algorithm will be designed to operate on and select inputs that satisfy values for the various native assets in this transaction.

Reviewer: good to use Markdown styles rather than changing fundamental text.

> -   <b>Step 1: Aggregator Function</b>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
##### Step 1: Aggregator Function
```

Reviewer 3: Use of headings rather than HTML "bold" tags for at least the top-level steps will allow better and easier permalinking to specific sections of the final document
